Soichiro Honda's picture now hangs with Henry Ford's in the U.S. Automotive Hall of Fameand the game-show "Jeopardy" is soon to be Sony-owned.
But no matter how much Japan gets under our skinwe'll still have mom and apple pie.
On second thought, make that just mom.
A Japanese applcalled the Fujis cropping up in orchards the waHondas did on U.S. roads.
By 1995 it will be planted more often than any other apple treeaccording to a recent survey of six apple-industry sages by Washington State University horticulturist Robert Norton.
Some fruit visionaries sathe Fuji could someday tumble the Red Delicious from the top of America's apple heap.
It certainly won't get there on looks.
Compared to the Red Delicious, the exemplar of apple pulchritudethe Fuji is decidedly more dowd-- generally smaller, less-perfectly shaped, greenish, with tinges of red.
To hear most U.S. growers tell itwe'd still be in Paradisif the serpent had proffered one to Eve.
But how sweet it is.
It has more sugar "than any applwe've ever tested,says Duane Greene, a University of Massachusetts pomologist, or apple scholar.
It has a long shelf lifand "doesn't fool the public,says Grady Auvil, an Orondo, Wash., growewho is planting Fujiand spreading the good word about them.
"It doesn't look nice on the outsidwhile getting mealy inside.Mr. Auvil, razor sharp at 83, has picked and packed a zillion pecks of apples over the past 65 years.
He is known as the father of the U.S.-grown Granny Smith, a radically different applthathe conventional wisdom once saiwould never catch on.
It didshaking the apple establishment to its roots.
Now, even more radical changes seem afooas the grand old maverick of American apples plays the role of Hiroshi Appleseed.
"The Fuji is going to be No. to replace the Red Delicious,he says.
The Delicious hegemony won't end anytime soon.
New apple trees grow slowlyand the Red Delicious is almost as entrenched as mom.
Its roots are patrioti-- with the first trees appearing in 1872 in an orchard near Peru, Iowato be exact.
For more than 50 years, it has been the apple of our eye.
A good Delicious can indeed be delicious.
More than twice as many Red Delicious apples are grown as the Golden variety, America's No. 2 apple.
But the apple industry is ripe for change.
"Red Delicious has been overplantedand its prices have dropped below the cost of production,says Washington State's Mr. Norton.
The scare over Alar, a growth regulatothat makes apples redder and crunchiebut may be carcinogenicmade consumers shy away from the Deliciousthough they were less affected than the McIntosh.
The glut and consequent lower pricescombined with cancer fearswas a very serious blow to growers.
"A lot of growers won't be around in a few years,says Mr. Nortonalthough they have stopped using Alar.
One may be William Broderick, a Sterling, Mass., grower.
"This is beautiful stuff,he sayslooking ruefully at big boxes of just-picked Red Delicious next to his barn.
"But I'm going to lose $50,000 to $60,000 on it.
I'm going to have to get another job this yeajust to eat.Besides rotten prices, he has been hit recently by hail, a bark-nibbling horde of mice, fungi and bugs.
Some 500 insects and 150 diseases wiggle, chew and romp through growers' nightmaresincluding maggots, mites, mildew, thrips, black rot and the flat-headed borer.
Even if a grower beats them backhis $2,000 rented bees might buzz off to the neighbors' orchardinstead of pollinating hisMr. Broderick says.
Though growers can't always keep the worm from the applethey can protect themselves against the price vagaries of any one varietby diversifyin-- into the recently imported Gala, a sweet New Zealand native; the Esopus Spitzenburg, reportedly Thomas Jefferson's favorite apple; disease-resistant kinds like the Liberty.
"I've ripped out a lot of Deliciousand grafted the trees with many different shootssays Steve Wood, a West Lebanon, N.H., growertramping through his 100-acre Poverty Lane Orchard on a crisp autumn day recently.
"I've got 70 kinds of apples.
Here's a Waltana,he exclaimspicking one off a tree.
He bites itscowland throws it down.
"It's a real dog.Supermarkets are getting into the variety act, too.
They still buy apples mainly for big, red good look-- that's why so many taste like woodchucks' punching bags.
But freshness countmore than it once didand stores are expanding shelf space for unconventional, but tastier, and often pricier, apples.
"Rather than sell 39-cents-a-pound Deliciousmaybe we can sell 79-cents-a-pound Fujis,says Chuck Tryon, perishables director for Super Valu Inc., a Minneapolis supermarket chain and food distributor.
The Fuji is a product of meticulous Japanese pomological engineeringwhich fostered it 50 years ago at a government research orchard.
Japanese researchers have bred dozens of strains of Fujito hone its color, taste and shelf life.
Now the best of them age as gracefully as Grannies, the industry's gold standard for storability.
In the cornucopia of go-go apples, the Fuji's track record stands outDuring the past 15 years, it has gone from almost zilch to some 50% of Japan's market.
"The Japanese apple market is very keyed to high quality,says David Lane, a scientist at a Canadian horticulture research center in Summerland, British Columbiaand so apples are more of a delicacy there than a big food commodity.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture estimatethat this year Americans will eat about 40% more fresh apples per capita than the Japanese.
The Fuji is still small potatoes in the U.S.sold mainly in fruit boutiques.
But in Californiasays Craig Ito, a Fuji-apple grower"There's a Fuji apple cult.
Once somebody eats onethey get hooked.Mr. Auvil, the Washington grower, saythat he could sell Fujis to Taiwan buyers at $40 a boif he had them.
(Taiwan already is a big importer of Fujis from other placeshe adds.But his first crop won't be picked till next year.
"I expect to see the demand exceed supply for Fujis for the next 10 to 15 years,he adds.
Washington Red Delicious, by the way, are wholesaling for less than $10 a box these days.
Mr. Auvil sees Fujis, in partas striking a blow against the perversion of U.S. apples by supermarkets.
"When the chain stores took overthere was no longer a connection between grower and consumer.
A guy is sitting up in an officdecidinwhat you're going to eat.After all, until the 1950s even the Red Delicious was a firm, delectable morsel.
Thenas growers bred them more for looksand to satisfy supermarket chains' demands of long-term storagethe Red went into decline.
Now, those red applelike thingstores sell in summeare fruitbowl lovelybut usually not good eating.
They do deserve respect, howeve-- they are almost a year old, probably equal to about 106 in human years.
The Fujito be surehas blemishes too.
It ripens later than most applesand growing it in U.S. areas with chilly autumns may be tricky.
Moreover, the frumpy Fuji must compete with an increasingly dolledup Delicious.
Mr. Broderick, the Massachusetts grower, saythe "big boss" at a supermarket chain even rejected his Red Delicious recentlbecause they weren't waxed and brushed for extra shine.
And he hadn't used hormoneswhich many growers emploto elongate their Delicious apples for greater eye appeal.
StillMr. Auvil points outGrannies became populawithout big, red looksso why not FujisHe sees a shift in American value-- at least regarding apples -toward more emphasis on substance and less on glitz.
"Taste has finally come to the fore,he says.
Or, for that matter, the core.
