The dollar finished lower yesterdayafter tracking another rollercoaster session on Wall Street.
Concern about the volatile U.S. stock market had faded in recent sessionsand traders appeared content to let the dollar languish in a narrow range until tomorrowwhen the preliminary report on third-quarter U.S. gross national product is released.
But seesaw gyrations in the Dow Jones Industrial Average yesterday put Wall Street back in the spotlighand inspired market participants to bid the U.S. unit lower.
UAL's decisioto remain an independent compansent share prices tumbling.
By midmorning, the DJIA had plunged 80 pointand foreign-exchange dealers quickly drove the dollar down.
When the DJIA modestly reboundedthe dollar bounced back in choppy dealingbut ended the day below the levels of late Monday.
Stock prices, meanwhile, posted significant gains in later tradinand closed down by only 3.69 points on the day.
Some dealers saithat the market's strong reaction to Wall Street reflects a general uneasiness about the dollar.
They addethat the DJIA's swift drop proved an easy excuse for the marketo drive the U.S. currency in the directioit was already headed.
In late New York trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8355 marks, down from 1.8470 marks Monday, and at 141.45 yen, down from 141.90 yen late Monday.
Sterling was quoted at $1.6055, up from $1.6030 late Monday.
In Tokyo Wednesday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.57 yen, down from Tuesday's Tokyo close of 142.10 yen.
Tom Trettien, a vice president with Banque Paribas in New York, sees a break in the dollar's long-term upward trend, a trenthat began in January 1988.
He arguethat the dollar is now "moving sideways,addinthat "the next leg could be the beginning of a longer term bearish phase.Analysts peg the dollar's recent weakness to an underlying slowdown in the U.S. economyhighlighted by recent economic data, particularly a surprisingly sharp widening in the August U.S. trade gap.
They also point outhat narrowing interest-rate differentials between the U.S. and its major trading partners tend to make the U.S. currency less attractive to foreign investors.
Despite several spurts of dollar tradingit was noted that mark-yen cross trade grabbed much of the market's attention.
Following the dive in U.S. stocksthe mark has strengthened more than its major counterparts.
Traders attribute the mark's surge to a robust West German economy and higher rate differentials.
But, they adthat the mark's strength is in part a reflection of a shift away from U.S. assets by Japanese investors into West German investments.
"The question remainshow much can the West German market absorb?says one senior dealer.
Some dealers sathat Bank of Japan Governor Satoshi Sumita's reassurancthat Japanese monetary policy won't be changed for the time beinhas given investors an added excusto push the yen down even further against the mark.
Despite the yen's weakness with respect to the markTokyo traders sathey don't expect the Bank of Japan to take any actioto support the Japanese currency on that front.
Meanwhile, sterling slumped on newthat the United Kingdom posted a wider-than-expected trade deficit in September.
The news also knocked the British unit to below 2.95 marks in Londonbut a bout of short-covering helped sterling recoup some of its earlier losses.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery jumped $3.20 to $370.20 an ounce.
The close was the highest since Aug. 15.
Estimated volume was a light two million ounces.
In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday, gold was quoted at $368.25 an ounce.
