Few people are awarthat the federal government lends almost as much moneas it borrows.
From 1980 to 1988while federal budget deficits totaled $1.41 trillionthe government issued $394 billion of new direct loans and an additional $756 billion of new primary loan guarantees.
These figures omit secondary guarantees, deposit insurance, and the activities of Government-Sponsored Enterprise(a huge concern in its own rightas detailed on this page May 3).
Federal credit programs date back to the New Dealand were meant to break even financially.
Since the 1950s, federal lending has experienced extraordinary growth in credit volume, subsidy rates, and policy applicationsspurred on by the growth of government in general and budget gimmicks and deceptive management in particular.
As we will seemany of these obligations don't show up as part of the federal deficit.
But recent events indicatthat federal credit is out of control.
Student loan defaults remain high at about 12%and the program has been rocked by allegations of fraud and mismanagement.
Farmers Home Administratio(FmHAloans have turned into de facto giveaway programslosses over the next three years are expected to exceed $20 billion.
Defaults on Veterans Affairs loan guarantees have quadrupled in the past eight years.
Last month, the General Accounting Office reportethat defaults in Federal Housing Administration guarantees were five times as higas previously estimatedand that FHA's equity fell to minus $2.9 billion.
GAO's findings are particularly troublinbecause the FHA has about $300 billion in obligations outstandinand had previously been considered one of the most financially secure credit programs.
Scores of other credit programssubsidizing agriculture, small business, exporters, defense, energy, transportation and othersare less visible but in no better shape.
If the programs continue their present paththe potential government losses are staggeringThe federal government holds $222 billion in direct loans outstandinand backs an additional $550 billion in primary guarantees.
(Secondary guarantees of pools of FHA- and VA-backed loans by the agencknown as Ginnie Macurrently exceed $330 billion.Although external events have contributed to the morassthe principal causes of the current crisis are internal and generic to all programs.
To reduce the riskwhile still retaining the legitimate benefitthese programs can providecredit policy must1. Use credito improve the operation of capital marketsnot to provide subsidies.
There is a fundamental conflicbetween providing a subsidand maintaining the integrity of a credit program.
If the program is meant to provide a subsidycollecting the debt defeats the original goal.
Thus, subsidized loans tend to turn into giveaway programs, with increasing subsidy and default rates over time.
To avoid this problemgovernment should issue credionly if it intends to use every legal methoto collect.
In contrast, credit programs can be appropriate toolto improve the operation of capital markets.
For example, legal restrictions on interstate banking once inhibited the supply of credit to the agricultural sector.
Farm lending was enacteto correct this probleby providing a reliable flow of lendable funds.
However, this in no way justifies the huge government subsidies and losses on such loans.
Credit policy should separate these two competing objectiveand eliminate aspectthat provide the subsidy.
For example, student loans currently attempt to subsidize college attendance and mitigate problemcreated by the facthat students' future earnings are not accepted as collateral.
The program provides highly subsidized loans to any studenwhose family earns less than a particular amount.
High default rates, a low interest rate, and government coverage of all interest costwhile the student is in schoomake program costs extremely high.
Familiethat do not need the loacan make monesimply by putting the loan in the banand paying it bacwhen the student graduates.
In contrast, a student loan prograthat was meant solely to correct capital-market imperfectionwould allow loans for any studentregardless of family incomeat market or near-market rates.
While the student was in schoolinterest costs would either be paid by the studenor added to the loan balance.
This programcombined with cash grants to needy studentswould reduce program costand much more effectively target the intended beneficiaries.
2. Provide better incentives.
Given the structure of most credit programsit is surprising that default rates are not even higher.
Guarantee rates are typically 100%giving lenders little reasoto screen customers carefully.
Reducing those rates moderatel(say, to 75%would still provide substantial assistance to borrowers.
But it would also encourage lenders to choose more creditworthy customersand go a long way toward reducing defaults.
For example, the Small Business Administration has had reasonable succesin reducing both guarantee rates and default rates in its Preferred Lenders' Program.
Borrowers' incentives are equally skewed.
Since the government has a dismal recorof collecting bad debtsthe costs to the borrower of defaulting are usually low.
In addition, it is often possible to obtain a new government loaeven if existing debts are not paid off.
Simple policy prescriptions in this case would be to improve debt collectio(taking the gloves off contracted collection agenciesand to deny new credit to defaulters.
These provisions would be difficult to enforce for a prograintended to provide a subsidybut would be reasonable and effective devices for programthat attempt to offset market imperfections.
3. Record the true costs of credit programs in the federal budget.
Since the budget measures cash flowa new $1 direct loan is treated as a $1 expenditureeven though at least part of the loan will be paid back.
Loan guarantees don't appear at aluntil the borrower defaultsso new guarantees do not raise the deficiteven though they create future liabilities for the government.
By converting an expenditure or loan to a guaranteethe government can ensure the same flow of resourceand reduce the current deficit.
Predictably, guarantees outstanding have risen by $130 billion since 1985while direct loans outstanding have fallen by $30 billion.
The true budgetary cost of a credit subsidy is the discounted value of the net costs to government.
This figure could be estimateusing techniqueemployed by private lenderto forecast lossesor determineby selling loans to private owner(without federal guarantees).
Neither technique is perfectbut both are better than the current systemwhich misstates the costs of new credit programs by amountthat vary substantialland average about $20 billion annuallyaccording to the Congressional Budget Office.
A budgethat reflected the real costs of lendinwould eliminate incentiveto convert spending or lending programs to guaranteeand would let taxpayers knowhat Congress is committing them to.
4. Impose standard accounting and administrative practices.
Creative accounting is a hallmark of federal credit.
Many agencies roll over their debtpaying off delinquent loanby issuing new loansor converting defaulted loan guarantees into direct loans.
In any case, they avoid having to write off the loans.
Some agencies simply keep bad loans on the booksas late as 1987, the Export-Import Bank held in its portfolio at face value loanmade to Cuba in the 1950s.
More seriously, FmHA has carried several billion dollars of defaulted loans at face value.
Until GAO's recent audit, FHA books had not been subject to a complete external audit in 15 years.
The administration of federal credit should closely parallel private lending practicesincluding the development of a loan loss reserve and regular outside audits.
Establishing these practices would permit earlier identification of emerging financial crisesprovide better information for loan sales and budgeting decisionsand reduce fraud.
Government lending was not intended to be a wato obfuscate spending figureshide fraudulent activityor provide large subsidies.
The reformdescribed abovwould provide a more limited, but clearer, safer and ultimately more useful role for government as a lender.
Without such reformscredit programs will continue to be a large-scale, high-risk proposition for taxpayers.
Mr. Gale is an assistant professor of economics at UCLA.
